## Measuring Individual Velocity

I see this far more often than I'd like.
Not only do we monitor a team's velocity, but we measure the velocity of each
individual on the team; or at least each individual developer.
Some of you are wondering why this is a problem.

If the team's velocity is the total work they complete in a given timeframe,
then the sum of the individual velocity for each team member is the team velocity.
It's probably good to know who is actually contributing and who needs improvement,
right?

And therein lies the problem.
On a healthy team, I want the lead developer delivering fewer points than the
rest of the team.
I want them taking time out to work on automation and standards.
I want them to mentor other developers and to collaborate with other teams that
we're dependent on.
I want them thinking about architecture and jumping on the big problems when
they arise.
If we track individual velocity, we're telling everyone on the team that their
individual performance is what matters.
We're telling our lead not to work on all of these other important items that are
better suited for her experience level.
We're telling our lead to focus on picking up stories and getting them done, just
like everybody else.

"Simple enough", you say, "give the lead special forgiveness."

Ah.
Right.
Only the plebeians should be measured and evaluated on personal velocity.
Except we want them to pair sometimes, maybe even mob.
We want them to share the work.
We want them to work collectively.
If a story gets started by one developer, but finished by another, who gets the
credit for the velocity?
If the story is completed by a pair, who gets the credit for the velocity?
If the story is mobbed, who gets the credit?
What about that system outage that turned into a three day war room and pulled
two of the developers away for an entire week?
What do we do about their individual velocity?

Measuring individual velocity fails to give us a complete picture.
It likely gives us the wrong impression.
People who help others will likely have lower velocity numbers.
People who get pulled off of story work to work on production issues will
definitely have lower velocity numbers.

So, to recap: Measuring individual velocity won't tell you who is actually
contributing to the team, who is improving process, or even who actually
delivers the most stories, but it will encourage your team to make collaboration
a secondary concern at best.
